---
title: 2021-11-18
---
## SocSci
#sociology #education 

[Demography and Human Capital: Why Education Matters](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=td4eO8APvOM)

+ **Demography:** the quantitative study of human populations – their size, composition and distribution – and the process through which populations change.
	+ What makes a population change? 3 factors
		+ fertility
		+ debts?
		+ migration
+ **Human capital** is the sum total of a population's health, knowledge, wealth, education, skills, etc... in terms of their value/cost to the country
+ **Flow** in education refers to the movement of people into schooling or out of schooling.
+ **Stock** of education refers to educational achievement and educational quality.

### Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) - Three Scenarios
1. **SSP1:** A rapidly developing and sustainable world with a more expanded educational system, lower mortality, and a more rapid fertility decline in high fertility countries.
2. **SSP2:** Some progress in development and in reaching sustainable goals with fertility and mortality levels slightly better than present levels.
3. **SSP3:** No progress. Assumes increasing global inequality with social and economic stagnation, with stagnant school enrolments and continued high fertility levels.

### Why Education Matters 
+ Education not only yields higher individual incomes, but is also a ==necessary precondition for economic growth.==
+ Education encourages ==pro-social== behavior.
+ Education spurs ==innovation==.
+ Education, especially among women, contributes significantly to ==slow down population growth.==

> “Education is not the filling of a pail but a lighting of the fire.”
> - William Butler Yeats