---
title: 2021-10-27
---
## SocSc13
#sociology 
[This Changes Everything – Naomi Klein | Guardian Docs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rqw99rJYq8Q)
+ Oil
+ Log of all the timber, strip the soil
+ We're now hitting harde resources, have higher carbon footprints and emissions
+ profit over planet
+ money that brings people here in the long run
+ The Tar Sands are being mined on the traditional territory of Indigenous peoples. Under legally binding treaties, they maintain the right to access their lands.
	+ We said that you can use the land to the depth of a plough. Anything beyond that is our responsibility.
	+ Companies wanted to OWN the land.
	+ No talk about ownership in the treaty. We will always have an inherent right to the land. They should still be able to hunt, forage, etc. just like they did in the past, and for the future
+ Native communiteis have had increasing concerns about petroleum spills on their ancestral land.
	+ You feel physically, directly responsible for effecting somebody else's health downstream
	+ What workers support is a transition over to a renewable energy source
+ The mental pathways of dirty energy mapping a new organic web of resistance.
	+ This latest wave of direct action is, in a way, the birth of a new territory.
	+ "Blockadia"
	+ Incredible transformation: they become stronger, they stand up
	+ New laws, new systems, new deals
+ Climate change can be the catalyst we need -- our common lens
	+ We are all part of this movement
+ What if we realized that real disaster response means fighting inequality and building a just economy? 
	+ That everyone working for a healthy food system is already a climate warrior.

## PHILO13
#philosophy #society #history
### Moral Case Analysis
+ Morality is a unique feature of the life of human beings. 
	+ It is deeply influenced by several cultural factors like history, tradition, education, religious belief, etc. 
	+ ==The intellectual analysis of this human dimension== in all its complexity is the goal of this moral philosophy course

> “Humans have probably always clustered into groups of some sort. The families came first, then tribes, clans, and eventually whole societies. This clustering facilitated human survival, the satisfaction of basic needs, and the development of communication. Part of such communication was ==the direction and guidance of conduct.==” 
> 
>"Conduct contrary to established and approved ways of doing things came to be discouraged and often punished. Prohibitions emerged and certain kinds of conduct were considered wrong. Other kinds were permitted or even expressly required and were deemed right or obligatory. Directives for regulating conduct coalesced over time into rules and principles as settled habits became transformed into customs and practices.”
>
> - Robert Holmes, *Basic Moral Philosophy*

#### Twofold Elements
+ **Value**
	+ *Values ==define the life of peoples and societies== and often provide ==unique identifiers of their culture.== Values predate ethics and form the background of many other moral concepts derived from them principles, norms, laws, virtues.*
	+ One of the most important goals of ethics is the ==intellectual analysis of values and value conflicts==, in order to define our duties.
+ **Duty**
	+ The experience of duty is one of the most universal characteristics of human life. There is ==no human society without some rules of conduct== in the form of either prohibitions or obligations.
	+ People everywhere consider that some things ought to be done and others avoided. There is a duty to act in certain ways rather than others.
#### Criterion and Directive
+ *The primacy of values and the universality of duty in human society form the ==bases for evaluating individual conduct.==*
+ They also provide the ==framework for making decisions.== It is the aim of ethics to equip us with rational justification for the action that we intend to perform.

### Aquinas
#### Background
+ had royal blood
+ family actively tried to prevent him from becoming a Dominican
+ His life may be summed up in a few words: praying, preaching, teaching, writing, journeying.

#### Thomistic  Moral Theory
+ Morality is the quest for happiness.
+ *Happiness is closely associated with the end or purpose of man.*
+ To achieve happiness man must fulfill his purpose.

+ **Aristotle:** envisioned a naturalistic morality through which men could achieve virtue by ==fulfilling their natural end==
+ **Aquinas:** added the ==doctrine of the supernatural end of man== and proposed a double level of morality according to his dual ends
	+ Being a Christian, Aquinas taught that human nature has its ==source and ultimate end in God.==
	+ Therefore, ==human nature does not contain its own standard of fulfillment. ==
		+ It is not enough for a man to be simply a man and to exercise his natural functions and abilities in order to achieve perfect happiness. 
	+ There is a double level of morality corresponding to man’s natural end and to his supernatural end.

> “Due to its potentiality and openness, the human soul is oriented to become actualized and fulfilled by something else....[N]ot one created good is in a position to fulfill wholly the infinite striving of the human being.... Due to its infinity, human striving cannot come to rest in creation, therefore, ==‘human happiness consists in God alone.==’”
> 
> George Wieland, “Happiness,” *The Ethics of Aquinas*

#### Will
##### Its Role
> “Moral acts are willed acts. Where the will does not operate, action has no moral quality whatsoever and falls back into the category of mere natural activity. And even in moral actions, external acts have a moral quality only because they have been commanded by the will. ==Thus moral goodness is located first and foremost in the will.==”
> 
> David M. Gallagher, “The Will and Its Acts”

+ A person is said to be good or bad simply or morally, on the basis of his will, for ==it is through the will that everything else in the person is used well or badly.==
+ *Moral action is willed action and morally good action arises from a good will.*

##### Its Nature
+ *the power or faculty of the soul by which a human agent is in control of his actions*
+ ==*The will is the power of choice.*==

> “To have control means that when the person acts, it is possible to act otherwise or not to act at all. This mode of acting is contrasted to the mode of nature in which an agent is determined to act in only one way and cannot do otherwise than it does.”
> 
> David M. Gallagher, “The Will and Its Acts”

+ **Reason -> Will -> Action**
+ The full range of appetites seeks to be satisfied and in man the process of satisfaction requires that choices be made between alternatives. ==The choice must be made by the will under the direction of reason.==
+ If the right choices are made, a person achieves happiness.

#### The Moral Constitution of Man
+ *The moral constitution of man consists of ==sensuality, appetites, the will, and reason.*==
+ If a man were moved to act by his appetites in a mechanical or rigorously determined way, ==his acts would not be free and could not be considered from a moral point of view.==
+ Not only is freedom a prerequisite for an act to be considered moral.
+ ==*An act is human only if it is free.*==
+ Freedom is possible where there is ==knowledge of alternatives== and the ==power of the will to make choices.==
+ Not every choice is correct. The will by itself cannot always make the right move.
+ *Reason or the intellect* must serve as its guide.
+ *When the intellect directs the will, it helps the will to choose the good.*
+ The virtues of the natural man are achieved when the appetites are duly controlled by the will and reason.
+ The natural end of man is further realized through his ==knowledge of the natural or the moral law.==
+ **Law -> Reason -> Will**
+ *When reason is guided by the law, it is able to guide the will properly.*
+ **The Moral Law -> Reason -> Will -> The Exterior Act**

> Law is a dictate of practical reason for the common good promulgated by one who has care of the community. A supposed law that lacks any of these four criteria is not a genuine law.
> 
> Coercion is not of the essence of law but ==coercion by threat of sanction is necessary because not all subjects will readily listen to the law.==
> 
> - Clifford G. Kossel, “Natural Law and Human Law”

#### Kinds of Law
+ Eternal Law
+ Natural Law
+ Human Law
+ Divine Law

##### The Eternal Law
+ *the design or plan in the eternal mind which serves as the ==ruling principle of all the activities of creation==*
+ DIVINE PROVIDENCE
+ LAW OF NATURE
	+ E.G. time passing? sunset and sunrise

>The very idea of the governance of things existing in the Divine mind has the nature of law, and since divine reason transcends time, this conception must be eternal. And this plan looks principally to the order of the whole to its common good. Eternal law is comprehensive; it ==applies to the movement of all creatures... in different ways.==
>
>- Clifford G. Kossel, “Natural Law and Human Law”

+ E.G. The Butterfly Story
	+ detached a crysalis, found a living thing inside
	+ was not in a hurry to expose itself to the sunlight, but the one who picked it was
	+ emerged immature and died

##### The Natural Law
+ the portion of the eternal law that pertains particularly to man and consists of ==broad general principles that reflect the divine intentions for man==
+ *the participation in the eternal law by the rational creatures*

> “[Man] is under divine providence in a more excellent way...as it shares in divine providence by exercising providence for itself and others....This participation in the eternal law is called natural law.... This does not exclude free choice, but it does insist that ==underlying free acts there is some natural determination and necessity==.”
> 
> - Clifford G. Kossel, “Natural Law and Human Law”

###### Precepts of the Natural Law
+ **General:** *Good is to be pursued and evil is to be avoided.*
+ **Particular:** As being -> as animal -> as rational
	+ As being: to preserve the self (e.g. plant)
	+ As animal: to propagate the species (e.g. pet)
	+ As rational: to tend to the truth (e.g. human)

+ Morality is not an arbitrary set of rules for behavior.
+ ==*The basis of moral obligation is found in the very nature of man.*==
+ Although the ‘common’ principles of natural law cannot be abolished from the mind as universals, they may be eliminated in a particular action because ==reason may be impeded from applying the universal principle to the particular action by some passion.==
	+ E.G. Bad beliefs, evil customs, corrupt habbits

##### The Human Law
+ *==specific statutes of government== derived from the general precept of the natural law*
+ “From the precepts of the natural law, the human reason needs to proceed to the more particular determination of certain matters.”
+ + What gives a rule the character of law is its ==moral dimension, its conformity with the precepts of natural law, its agreement with the moral law.==
+ *“Every human law has just so much of the nature of law, as it is derived from the law of nature.”*
+ If in any point it ==deflects from the law of nature==, it is no longer a law but a ==perversion of law. ==
	+ Such a law no longer binds in conscience but is sometimes obeyed in order to prevent an even greater evil. 
	+ Such command should otherwise not be obeyed.
+ **Limits of Human Law**
	+ Human law can be contrary to divine law.
	+ Human law is affected by the uncertainty of human judgment, especially in particular and contingent matters with which morality and law deal.
	+ Human law is only about matters that humans can judge, and these are exterior acts of virtue.
	+ Human law cannot prohibit or punish all evils.
+ **Unjust Human Laws**; laws can be unjust in 2 ways:
	+ when it is contrary to the human good by violating any of the requirements of law
	+ when it violates the divine good or law, such as laws requiring idolatry
+ E.G. The cardinal and the lawyer

> “When a man deserts his private conscience for the sake of public duty, he betrays himself and leads hiscountry by a short road into chaos.”
> - *Saint Thomas More*

> “We must obey God rather than men.”
> - Acts 5:29

##### The Divine Law

--- 
Applied to analysis essay
+ natural law: 10 commandments? not right to steal? or lie? idk search it up
+ human law: law against vote buying

